This document describes the Smatch project and its development conventions
for AI assistants.

The author of Smatch is Dan Carpenter.  He is a Linux programmer familiar
with C, git, patch, diff and bash.  He prefers small, carefully isolated
changes instead of broad refactoring.  Change one thing at a time.

Smatch is a public project.  Code may be reviewed and submitted upstream, so
do not hide or obscure the use of AI-generated code.  See AI ATTRIBUTION
below.


PURPOSE

Smatch is a static analysis tool for C.  It is primarily used to find bugs in
the Linux kernel, but it can analyze other projects.  Smatch uses a modified
version of Sparse as its C parser.

Smatch should produce specific, useful bug reports.  Do not add warnings only
to enforce a coding-style preference.  False positives matter.  A narrowly
focused check which finds real bugs is preferable to a broad warning which
mostly reports correct code.


SOURCE TREE

- check_*.c files are individual checks.
- smatch_*.c files are core analysis modules used by checks.
- The other C and header files are mostly the bundled Sparse parser.
- smatch.h contains the interfaces used by checks.
- smatch_flow.c controls traversal and dispatches generic hooks.
- smatch_function_hooks.c implements hooks for named function calls.
- smatch_data/ contains project data and the cross-function database tools.
- smatch_scripts/ contains scripts for checking projects and building data.
- validation/ contains the test suite.
- Documentation/ contains user and developer documentation.

The Makefile builds every check_*.c file.  build_check_list.sh generates
smatch_checks.h from the filenames, so a new check does not require editing a
central check list.

Smatch and the bundled Sparse code have different licenses.  Smatch is
GPLv2 or later.  Sparse is MIT licensed.  Changes shared with Sparse should be
sent to the Sparse mailing list rather than committed only to Smatch.


DEVELOPMENT PHILOSOPHY

- Make the smallest change which fixes the problem.
- Preserve existing behavior outside the requested change.
- Assume unusual behavior may be intentional until the code proves otherwise.
- Avoid refactoring unless it is necessary or explicitly requested.
- Keep refactoring separate from functional changes whenever practical.
- Keep each patch focused on one logical change.
- Keep commits buildable and bisectable.
- Avoid unrelated formatting and whitespace changes.
- Do not add comments which only restate obvious code.
- Put the reason for a change in the commit message when that is sufficient.
- Prefer plain-text documentation and output.

When adding an item to a list which is logically an unordered set, keep the
list in alphabetical order.  Examples include object lists in the Makefile,
tables of unrelated functions or macros, and lists in documentation.  This is
a guideline, not a reason to reorder unrelated existing code in a functional
patch.

Do not alphabetize a list when its order expresses behavior, dependencies or
relationships.  Preserve initialization and hook ordering, priority order,
and paired entries such as the do/undo pairs in pairs.h.  Follow an existing
semantic pattern when it is more useful than alphabetical order.  Historical
lists are not always sorted; when adding an independent item, place it
alphabetically when that does not obscure the local structure.

When fixing a checker warning, test whether the warning describes a real bug.
Fix false positives in Smatch instead of changing correct target code merely
to silence the checker.


REPOSITORY STATE

The supplied source tree may contain a mixture of committed changes, modified
tracked files and files which are not yet in git.  This is normal development
state.  Do not discard, overwrite, stage or commit existing work unless Dan
explicitly asks for that.

Before editing, inspect at least:

    git status --short
    git diff

Determine whether every file needed for the requested change exists in the
base commit.  This determines the correct patch format.

It is acceptable for a change to touch both committed and uncommitted code,
but a git-format patch cannot represent modifications relative to an
uncommitted base which is absent from git.  In that situation, use a unified
diff for the whole logical change as described in PATCH DELIVERY.  A raw
unified diff can modify tracked files as well as untracked files.

Never use destructive commands such as git reset --hard or git checkout --
to clean a supplied tree.  Existing changes belong to Dan.


BUILD AND TEST

Build from the source directory with:

    make -j$(nproc)

Run the complete validation suite with:

    make check

Run one validation test from the validation directory with:

    ./test-suite single test-name.c

New checks and bug fixes normally need a focused validation test.  A useful
test contains code which must warn and nearby code which must not warn.  Test
real affected code when it is available.

The Linux kernel helpers are:

    smatch_scripts/kchecker path/to/file.c
    smatch_scripts/kchecker path/to/directory/
    smatch_scripts/test_kernel.sh

The optional cross-function database is built with:

    smatch_scripts/build_kernel_data.sh

Building the database takes a long time.  Do not require it for a local check
which does not use cross-function information.

Report the tests which were actually run.  Do not claim that a build or test
passed when it was skipped or stopped because a dependency was unavailable.


PATCH DELIVERY

There are two patch workflows.  Choose the format based on the source being
changed, not personal preference.

1. Changes based on code which is already in git

Use normal commits and deliver mbox patches generated by git format-patch.
They must apply with git am.  Dan commonly applies them with:

    cat patch.mbox | git am -s

For a series, keep each logical change in a separate commit.  Do not include a
cover letter unless Dan requests one.  The mbox should contain only patch
emails so the complete file applies without stopping on an empty message.

2. Changes based on code which is not yet in git

Deliver a normal unified diff which applies from the repository root with:

    cat patch | patch -p1

This includes changes to an untracked file which already exists in Dan's
working tree.  Generate the diff against the supplied working version of that
file, not against /dev/null.  A new-file git diff can fail because patch will
think that the existing untracked file must be created.

Use paths prefixed with a/ and b/ so -p1 strips one component.  Include enough
context to detect a mismatched working version.  Verify the patch against a
copy of the exact supplied tree before delivery.

Do not mix mbox patch emails and raw unified diffs in one file.  If one logical
change depends on uncommitted code, use a raw unified diff for the complete
change.  Deliver both formats only for separate changes when that is useful,
and explain the order in which to apply them.


AI ATTRIBUTION

Code written with substantive AI assistance must say so in the commit
message.  Add this trailer after the explanatory commit-message body:

    Assisted-by: ChatGPT:gpt-5

Use the actual assistant and model name when it is known.  For example, a
different model should not be labeled gpt-5.  If the exact minor model is not
known, use the stable model family rather than guessing.

The Assisted-by trailer is separate from Signed-off-by.  Do not invent or add
Dan's Signed-off-by trailer.  Dan adds his own sign-off when he applies or
sends a patch.  Do not invent Reviewed-by, Tested-by or Acked-by trailers.

Use the Assisted-by trailer for AI-generated code and substantive AI-generated
changes to tests.  It is not necessary when AI only reformats text supplied by
Dan, searches the tree or explains existing code without changing it.  When
in doubt, disclose the assistance.

For a raw unified diff which does not contain a commit message, provide a
suggested commit message next to the patch and include the Assisted-by trailer
there.


COMMIT MESSAGES

- Use an imperative, concise subject describing the change.
- Explain why the change is needed, not only what the diff does.
- Wrap commit-message body lines at 74 characters or fewer.
- Keep trailers together at the end of the message.
- Include the user request which led to the patch, either verbatim or as a
  concise paraphrase.  Prefer a paraphrase when the original prompt is long,
  conversational or includes details which are not useful in the permanent
  history.  Preserve the technical intent and important constraints.
- Do not add a Signed-off-by trailer on Dan's behalf.

Example:

    check_example: avoid warning after pointer reassignment

    Reassigning the pointer makes the previously recorded state stale.
    Clear the state from the modification hook so later dereferences do
    not produce a false positive.

    Prompt: Clear stale state after a pointer is reassigned.

    Assisted-by: ChatGPT:gpt-5


CONTRIBUTING PATCHES

Smatch uses the Linux mailing-list patch workflow.  Contributors should send
patches and patchsets as plain-text email to:

    smatch@vger.kernel.org

Use git send-email or another client which preserves patches without HTML or
word wrapping.  A typical command is:

    git send-email --to=smatch@vger.kernel.org 000*.patch

Before sending:

- Rebase the series on an appropriate current Smatch revision.
- Build Smatch and run the relevant validation tests.
- Run git diff --check.
- Keep one logical change per patch.
- Explain the reason for the change and the tests performed.
- Add your own Signed-off-by trailer to certify the Developer's Certificate
  of Origin.
- Preserve any applicable Assisted-by trailer.

Use [PATCH] for a single patch and numbered [PATCH 1/N] subjects for a series.
When sending a revised series, mark it v2, v3 and so on, and describe changes
since the previous version below the --- separator.  Send the complete revised
series rather than only the patches which changed.

Patches for the bundled Sparse code should normally be sent to:

    linux-sparse@vger.kernel.org

Ask on smatch@vger.kernel.org when it is unclear whether a change belongs in
Smatch or Sparse.


FINAL REVIEW

Before delivering a change:

- Re-read the request and confirm that the patch does only that work.
- Inspect the complete diff, not only the files intentionally edited.
- Check that existing uncommitted work remains intact.
- Verify the chosen patch format against the correct base.
- Run git diff --check or an equivalent whitespace check.
- Run the narrowest relevant test and broader tests when practical.
- State any test or build limitation clearly.
- Confirm that AI-generated code has an Assisted-by trailer.
